Hi Donald (and Martin),

Thanks for pinging me; it's nice to know Typesafe is keeping tabs on this, and I
appreciate the tone. This is a Yegge-long response, but given that you and
Martin are the two people best-situated to do anything about this, I'd rather
err on the side of giving you too much to think about. I realize I'm being very
critical of something in which you've invested a great deal (both financially
and professionally) and I want to be explicit about my intentions: I think the
world could benefit from a better Scala, and I'd like to see that work out even
if it doesn't change what we're doing here.

Right now at Yammer we're moving our basic infrastructure stack over to Java,
and keeping Scala support around in the form of façades and legacy libraries.
It's not a hurried process and we're just starting out on it, but it's been a
long time coming. The essence of it is that the friction and complexity that
comes with using Scala instead of Java isn't offset by enough productivity
benefit or reduction of maintenance burden for it to make sense as our default
language. We'll still have Scala in production, probably in perpetuity, but
going forward our main development target will be Java.

So.

Scala, as a language, has some profoundly interesting ideas in it. That's one of
the things which attracted me to it in the first place. But it's also a very
complex language. The number of concepts I had to explain to new members of our
team for even the simplest usage of a collection was surprising: implicit
parameters, builder typeclasses, "operator overloading", return type inference,
etc. etc. Then the particulars: what's a Traversable vs. a TraversableOnce?
GenTraversable? Iterable? IterableLike? Should they be choosing the most general
type for parameters, and if so what was that? What was a =:= and where could
they get one from?

A lot of this has been waved away as something only library authors really need
to know about, but when an library's API bubbles all of this up to the top (and
since most of these features resolve specifics at the call site, they do),
engineers need to have an accurate mental model of how these libraries work or
they shift into cargo-culting snippets of code as magic talismans of
functionality.

In addition to the concepts and specific implementations that Scala introduces,
there is also a cultural layer of what it means to write idiomatic Scala. The
most vocal — and thus most visible — members of the Scala community at large
seem to tend either towards the comic buffoonery of attempting to compile their
Haskell using scalac or towards vigorously and enthusiastically reinventing the
wheel as a way of exercising concepts they'd been struggling with or curious
about. As my team navigated these waters, they would occasionally ask things
like: "So this one guy says the only way to do this is with a bijective map on a
semi-algebra, whatever the hell that is, and this other guy says to use a
library which doesn't have docs and didn't exist until last week and that he
wrote. The first guy and the second guy seem to hate each other. What's the
Scala way of sending an HTTP request to a server?" We had some patchwork code
where idioms which had been heartily recommended and then hotly criticized on
Stack Overflow threads were tried out, but at some point a best practice
emerged: ignore the community entirely.

Not being able to rely on a strong community presence meant we had to fend for
ourselves in figuring out what "good" Scala was. In hindsight, I definitely
underestimated both the difficulty and importance of learning (and teaching)
Scala. Because it's effectively impossible to hire people with prior Scala
experience (of the hundreds of people we've interviewed perhaps three had Scala
experience, of those three we hired one), this matters much more than it might
otherwise. If we take even the strongest of JVM engineers and rush them into
writing Scala, we increase our maintenance burden with their funky code; if we
invest heavily in teaching new hires Scala they won't be writing production code
for a while, increasing our time-to-market. Contrast this with the default for
the JVM ecosystem: if new hires write Java, they're productive as soon as we can
get them a keyboard.

Even once our team members got up to speed on Scala, the development story was
never as easy as I'd thought it would be. Because one never writes pure Scala in
an industrial setting, we found ourselves having to superimpose four different
levels of mental model — the Scala we wrote, the Java we didn't write, the
bytecode it all compiles into, and the actual problem we were writing code to
solve. It wasn't until I wrote some pure Java that I realized how much extra
burden that had been, and I've heard similar comments from other team members.
Even with services that only used Scala libraries, the choice was never between
Java and Scala; it was between Java and Scala-and-Java.

Adding to the unease in development were issues with the build toolchain. We
started with SBT 0.7, which offered a pleasant interface to some rather dubious
internals, but by the time SBT 0.10 came out, we'd had endless issues trying to
debug or extend SBT. We looked at using 0.10, but we found it to have the exact
same problems managing dependencies (read: Ivy), two new, different flavors of
inpenetrable, undocumented, symbol-heavy API, and an implementation which can
only be described as an idioglossia. The fact that SBT plugin authors had to
discover what "best practices" are in order to avoid making two plugins
accidentally incompatible should have been a red flag for any tool which
includes typesafety as a selling point. (The fact that I tried to write a plugin
to replace SBT's usage of Ivy with Maven's Aether library should have been a red
flag for me.) We ended up moving to Maven, which isn't pretty but works. We
jettisoned all of the SBT plugins I wrote to duplicate Maven functionality, our
IDE integration worked properly, and the rest of our release toolchain (CI,
deployment, etc.) no longer needed custom shims to work. But using Maven really
highlighted the second-class status assigned to it in the Scala ecosystem. In
addition to the "enterprisey" cat-calls and disbelief from the community, we
found out that pointing out scalac's incremental compilation bugs had gotten
that feature removed outright. Even the deprecation warning for -make: suggests
using SBT or an IDE. This emphasis on SBT being the one true way has meant the
marginalization of Maven and Ant -- the two main build tools in the Java
ecosystem. Cross-building is also crazy-making. I don't have any good solutions
for backwards compatibility, but each major Scala release being incompatible
with the previous one biases Scala developers towards newer libraries and
promotes wheel-reinventing in the general ecosystem. Most Scala releases contain
improvements in day-to-day programming (including compilation speed), but an
application developer has to wait until all their dependencies are upgraded
before they themselves can upgrade. If they can't wait, they have to take on the
maintenance burden of that library indefinitely. In order to reduce their
maintenance overhead, they naturally look for another, roughly equivalent
library with a more responsive author. Even if the older library is better-
tested, better-documented, and better-featured it will still lose out over time
as developers jump ship for something that works with Scala 2.next sooner. (It's
also worth noting that most companies using Scala at scale or in mission-
critical capacities will not immediately upgrade; the library authors they
employ will likely be similarly conservative, and the benefit their experience
brings to their code will benefit the community less and less over time. As far
as I've found, we're the only big startup in SF using 2.9.) Once in production,
Scala's runtime characteristics were the least subtle problem. At one point,
half the team was working on a distributed database, and given the write fanout
for our large networks some parts of the code could be called 10-20M times per
write. Via profiling and examining the bytecode we managed to get a 100x
improvement by adopting some simple rules:

1. Don't ever use a for-loop. Creating a new object for the loop closure,
passing it to the iterable, etc., ends up being a forest of invokevirtual calls,
even for the simple case of iterating over an array. Writing the same code as a
while-loop or tail recursive call brings it back to simple field access and
gotos. While I'm sure Scala will be have better optimizations in the future, we
had to mutilate a fair portion of our code in order to actually ship it. (In
another service, we got away with just using the ScalaCL compiler plugin and
copying things to and from arrays instead of using immutable collections.)

2. Don't ever use scala.collection.mutable. Replacing a
scala.collection.mutable.HashMap with a java.util.HashMap in a wrapper produced
an order-of-magnitude performance benefit for one of these loops. Again, this
led to some heinous code as any of its methods which took a Builder or
CanBuildFrom would immediately land us with a mutable.HashMap. (We ended up
using explicit external iterators and a while-loop, too.)

3. Don't ever use scala.collection.immutable. Replacing a
scala.collection.immutable.HashMap with a java.util.concurrent.ConcurrentHashMap
in a wrapper also produced a large performance benefit for a strictly read-only
workload. Replacing a small Set with an array for lookups was another big win,
performance-wise.

4. Always use private[this]. Doing so avoids turning simple field access into an
invokevirtual on generated getters and setters. Generally HotSpot would end up
inlining these, but inside our inner serialization loop this made a huge
difference.

5. Avoid closures. Ditching Specs2 for my little JUnit wrapper meant that the
main test class for one of our projects (~600-700 lines) no longer took three
minutes to compile or produced 6MB of .class files. It did this by not capturing
everything as closures. At some point, we stopped seeing lambdas as free and
started seeing them as syntactic sugar on top of anonymous classes and thus
acquired the same distaste for them as we did anonymous classes.

Now, every language has its performance issues, and the best a standard library
can hope to do is to hit 80% of use cases. But what we found were pervasive
issues — we could replace all of our own usages of s.c.i.HashMap, but it's a
class which is extensively used throughout the standard library. It being slower
than j.u.HashMap means groupBy is slower, as is a lot of other collections
functionality I like.

At some point, I wondered if the positive aspects of our development experience
owed less to Scala and more to the set of libraries we use, so I spent a few
days and roughly ported a medium-sized service to pure Java. I broached this
issue with the team, demo'd the two codebases, and was actually surprised by the
rather immediate consensus on switching. There's definitely aspects of Scala
we'll miss, but it's not enough to keep us around.

Already I've moved our base web service stack to Java, with Scala support as a
separate module. New services are already being written on it, and given the
results from our Hack Day at the beginning of this week it hasn't slowed our
ability to quickly ship complex code. I'm keeping a close eye on the effects of
this change, but I'm optimistic, and the team seems excited. We'll see.

So.

I've tried hard here not to offer you advice. Some of these problems could
easily be specific to our team and our workload; some of them won't make a
difference in how your company does; some of them aren't even your problems to
solve, really. But they're still the problems we've encountered over the past
two years, and they compose the bulk of what's motivating this change.

Despite the fact that we're moving away from Scala, I still think it's one of
the most interesting, innovative, and exciting languages I've used, and I hope
this giant wall of opinion helps you in some way to see it succeed. If there's
anything here I can clarify for you, please let me know.
